#### Figure 1: Nonsynonymous divergence in S1 is correlated with clade success
**A** For every clade in the phylogeny, divergence is measured relative to the root of the phylogeny and plotted against the date of the base of that clade. Nonsynonymous S1, synonymous S1, and nonsynonymous RdRp divergence are plotted separately. The primary axis (left, black ticks) displays divergence in mutations per codon, and the secondary axis (right, gray ticks) shows the absolute number of mutations accumulated in each clade. Each point is colored according to the lineage it belongs to. Points are fit by linear regression. **B** For every clade, divergence (as in A) is plotted against logistic growth rate and the points are fit by linear regression.

#### Figure 1 supplement 1: Phylogeny of 9544 SARS-CoV-2 genomes
Screenshot of the phylogeny used for the primary analyses in this manuscript. Tips and branches are colored according to lineage. An interactive version of this phylogeny can be accessed at nextstrain.org/groups/blab/ncov/adaptive-evolution/2021-05-15

#### Figure 1 supplement 2: Correlation between nonsynonymous divergence and clade success is strongest in S1
Nonsynonymous divergence (mutations per codon) is plotted against logistic growth rate for 8 genes (or subunits), as in Fig1B.

 <br /> <br /> <br />
#### Figure 2: S1 substitutions are temporally clustered
**A** Time line showing accumulation of S1 nonsynonymous, synonymous, and RdRp nonsynonymous mutations between the root and a representative tip (isolate USA/ME-HETL-J3202/2021) with wait times between mutations illustrated in below. The exact date of a mutation is chosen by randomly selecting a date along the branch the mutation occurs on. **B** Distribution of wait times between S1 nonsynonymous, S1 synonymous, and RdRp nonsynonymous mutations. Empirical wait times (in color) are plotted along with expected wait times (gray). Expected wait times determined from randomizing mutations across the phylogeny using a multinomial draw with mutation likelihood proportional to relative branch length. The results of 1000 iterations are shown. **C** ***i*** The mean empirical wait time from 1000 iterations of the analysis (colored bar) is compared to the distribution of mean expected wait times (gray) to yield a p-value. ***ii*** The proportion of observed wait times under 0.3 years (colored bar) is compared to the distribution of expected wait times under 0.3 years (gray).

#### Figure 2 supplement 1: Distribution of expected wait times is affected by the number of mutations that occur across the phylogeny.
The phylogeny was randomized with varying numbers of mutations to display the expected wait time distributions if 50, 100, 200, 300, 400 or 500 mutations occur on internal branches of the phylogeny. Each randomization is run for 10 iterations. The empirical number of S1 nonsynonymous, S1 synonymous, and RdRp nonsynonymous mutations observed on internal branches of the phylogeny are indicated.

 <br /> <br /> <br />
#### Figure 3: A 3-amino acid deletion in Nsp6 displays convergent evolution and occurs in succesful clades
**A** Every mutation observed on internal branches of the phylogeny is plotted according to the number of times this mutation occurs on the tree and the mean logistic growth rate of all clades it occurs in. Convergently-evolved mutations that appear 4 or more times across the phylogeny are shown in the inset. The average growth rate of all clades is shown with a dotted line. **B** Observed mean growth rates of convergently-evolved mutations are compared to the mean growth rate expected for a mutation occurring on the phylogeny the same number of times. Convergently-evolved mutations that have a mean growth rate falling at or above the 90th percentile of the expected values are labeled. **C** The analysis shown in panel A was completed for 5 time points, spanning two months. Each date represents the maximum date of sequences included in the analysis. Mutations that occur at least 4 times (convergent mutations) and result in a higher-than-average mean growth rate are shown in dark yellow. Mutations that display convergent evolution but do not result in high growth rates are in light yellow. The primary analysis was done using 2021-05-15 (outlined in red). 

#### Figure 3 supplement 1: Every occurrence of the 3-amino acid deletion in Nsp6 resulted in an emerging lineage
Every occurrence of the convergently-evolved mutations is colored according to the emerging lineage it occurs at the base of. Multiple emerging lineages descending from the branch a mutation occurs on is represented by light purple.

#### Figure 3 supplement 2: Analyses of convergent evolution shown 1 month before and 1 month after the primary analysis
**A** Same as Fig3A, completed using sequences up to April 15, 2021 (1 month before the primary analysis). **B** Same as Fig3B, completed using sequences up to April 15, 2021. **C** Same as Fig3A, completed using sequences up to June 15, 2021 (1 month after the primary analysis). **D** Same as Fig3B, completed using sequences up to June 15, 2021.

 <br /> <br /> <br />
#### Figure 4: Clades with the 3-amino acid deletion in Nsp6 have a higher number of S1 mutations.
**A** The difference in the number of nonsynonymous S1 (dark blue), S1 synonymous (light blue), and nonsynonymous RdRp (orange) mutations that occur before versus after a convergently-evolved mutation is shown. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. **B** The mean number of S1 mutations (top), or RdRp mutations (bottom), that occur in clades that have (blue/orange) or do not have (gray) the 3-amino acid deletion in Nsp6. The expected difference is shown on the left, and empirical data is shown on the right. Expectation is based off of 100 randomizations of the tree. Error bars shown standard deviation.
